# SC Shortname

Pointer

# SC Text

All functionality can be operated with pointer inputs. If functionality requires text entry, a mechanism is available for users to enter the text using pointer inputs (for instance, through an on-screen keyboard).

Note 1: in most cases, the on-screen keyboard will already be provided by the operating system or user agent.

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)

Level A

# Related Glossary additions or changes

Pointer inputs: input devices that can target a specific coordinate (or set of coordinates) on a screen, such as a mouse, pen, or touch contact. (modified slightly from https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#glossary)

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 2, *new* Guideline "Pointer Accessible"

# Description

While it is important for authors to ensure that content/functionality is operable using a keyboard, there are situations in which a user may not be able to operate a keyboard or keyboard-like interface. For instance, on mobile/tablet devices, the primary input mechanism is a touchscreen. While these devices do provide on-screen keyboards, generally these keyboards are only available to the user when focus is in an interface component that expects keyboard entry (such as a text input field). Moreover, these on-screen keyboards usually lack many of the keys available on regular physical keyboards (such as cursor keys, TAB, ESC).

If content is designed with the expectation that users can, at any given point, press a particular key or key combination, it will not be possible to operate the content in these situations. Examples include

* Pop-up windows that can only be closed / dismissed via the ESC key
* Custom text input fields, not coded as standard `<input>` elements. Applications may not automatically trigger the display of an on-screen virtual keyboard
* Situations where important functionality may only be displayed when an element is focused via the keyboard (by listening for the TAB/SHIFT+TAB key combination)

As such, authors must ensure that all content and functionality can also be operated using only a pointer input.

Editorial note: WCAG 2.0 currently takes it for granted that content will be designed/built to work with pointer inputs (generally, mouse). This is not always a given, and for completeness should be added. Needs cautious wording to ensure we're not requiring authors to build their own on-screen keyboards etc, probably through use of "a mechanism is available" language which would then cover situations where the OS/UA themselves provide on-screen keyboards (see discussion https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-mobile-a11y-tf/2016Jul/0014.html)

# Benefits

Making sure that all functionality can be used via pointer input (mouse, stylus, touch) helps users of devices without keyboard. When applications support keyboard commands for specific functions, this success criterion ensures that there are equivalent means to activate these functions via pointer input.

# Testability

Check if all functions designed for keyboard input (e.g. functions detecting specific key presses) can also be activated via pointer (this is usually the case if device independent event handler like `onclick`, `onfocus` or `onblur` have been used, rather than `onkeypress`, `onkeydown`, `onkeyup`).

# Techniques

* Use device independent input events 
* If needed, double up event handlers to also include touch events/pointer events
* Use standard HTML form controls, rather than custom-built inputs
* could be a variant of "SCR35: Making actions keyboard accessible by using the onclick event of anchors and buttons" - 
(suggestion: could be reworked as "SCR35: Making actions both keyboard and pointer accessible by using the onclick event of anchors and buttons") 
