SCs/m14.md, before:

# SC Shortname

Non-interference of Assistive Technology

# SC Text
Content does not interfere with the normal operation of the platform assistive technology, or a mechanism is available to override the interference, unless:

* it is essential for use of the content, and
* the user is warned before using the component.

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)
A

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 4, Guideline 4.1 - Compatible (Or perhaps this is really a 4.2)

# Description

The intent of this success criterion is to prevent content from interfering with platform assistive technology.  

A common scenario is passing touch through directly to the content, bypassing the AT entirely. Touch ATs rely on the users ability to interact with a series of gestures to control focus, interract, and speak descriptions of on screen elements.  If the content overrides these gestures, users dependant upon these mechanisms for content interaction will be unable to perform basic functions. While this may be required for certain types of content, if such content covers significant area of the screen, it could completely block the use of the device by touch AT users, as performing swipe gestures on small patches of screen can be difficult.  

Users should be warned before entering any section of content that changes the way the platform AT intercepts touch gestures.

Note: This criterion differs from the Touch with AT success criterion, in that the Touch with AT requires users not to use gestures, as the platform AT may block them.  This criterion requires that content does not supress gestures the AT may be relying on.

Note: the intent behind this SC is possibly already covered by https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5. However, it's not clearly called out, and ensuring that (particularly touch) AT isn't blocked/circumvented is not explicitly covered in the list of SCs that still need to apply to all page content (1.4.2, 2.1.2, 2.3.1, 2.2.2). There is further concern that although https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5 is part of the normative spec text, it is slightly "buried" (as many authors will simply work their way through the SCs), so having an explicit SC (which could then be cross-referenced from https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5) would arguably be the more robust approach.


# Benefits

* Users who use a mobile device where touch screen is the primary mode of interaction
* Users with visual impairments who depend on spoken feedback

# Testability

1. Locate all major content sections, and ensure AT gesture navigation works as expected for all sections.
2. Locate any items that bypass AT gesture navigation.
3. Ensure that either the control that loaded this content warned of its presence OR that the content has a preview mode that does not bypass gesture navigation.

# Techniques

Content Preview with Available Mechanism: Load the content first, without gesture overrides/AT Bypassing mechanisms, and confirm that the user wants gestures overridden.  EX: A confirmation dialogue before asking for a signature, confirmation dialogue re-appears each time focus leaves the signature panel.

Content Warning: An element that will load a control that bypasses the AT warns the user. EX: A warning on a control that loads a "paint" window.

Failure: A "paint" drawing screen with no heading, no warning, and no preview.  Content fills up screen, making ANY gesture based navigation difficult, trapping the user on that screen, unless they have a device with a hardware back button.

Commit message:

Add role="application"/desktop AT scenario

SCs/m14.md, after:

# SC Shortname

Non-interference of Assistive Technology

# SC Text
Content does not interfere with the normal operation of the platform assistive technology, or a mechanism is available to override the interference, unless:

* it is essential for use of the content, and
* the user is warned before using the component.

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)
A

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 4, Guideline 4.1 - Compatible (Or perhaps this is really a 4.2)

# Description

The intent of this success criterion is to prevent content from interfering with platform assistive technology.  

A common scenario is passing touch through directly to the content, bypassing the AT entirely. Touch ATs rely on the users ability to interact with a series of gestures to control focus, interract, and speak descriptions of on screen elements.  If the content overrides these gestures, users dependant upon these mechanisms for content interaction will be unable to perform basic functions. While this may be required for certain types of content, if such content covers significant area of the screen, it could completely block the use of the device by touch AT users, as performing swipe gestures on small patches of screen can be difficult.  

A further scenario is the inappropriate use of `role="application"` on regular content (rather than in "app-like" situations), which in the case of many current assistive technologies in a desktop environment results in standard AT controls (such as quick navigation and reading keys) being disabled.

Users should be warned before entering any section of content that changes the way the platform AT intercepts touch gestures.

Note: This criterion differs from the Touch with AT success criterion, in that the Touch with AT requires users not to use gestures, as the platform AT may block them.  This criterion requires that content does not supress gestures the AT may be relying on.

Note: the intent behind this SC is possibly already covered by https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5. However, it's not clearly called out, and ensuring that (particularly touch) AT isn't blocked/circumvented is not explicitly covered in the list of SCs that still need to apply to all page content (1.4.2, 2.1.2, 2.3.1, 2.2.2). There is further concern that although https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5 is part of the normative spec text, it is slightly "buried" (as many authors will simply work their way through the SCs), so having an explicit SC (which could then be cross-referenced from https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/#cc5) would arguably be the more robust approach.


# Benefits

* Users who use a mobile device where touch screen is the primary mode of interaction
* Users with visual impairments who depend on spoken feedback

# Testability

1. Locate all major content sections, and ensure AT gesture navigation works as expected for all sections.
2. Locate any items that bypass AT gesture navigation.
3. Ensure that either the control that loaded this content warned of its presence OR that the content has a preview mode that does not bypass gesture navigation.

# Techniques

Content Preview with Available Mechanism: Load the content first, without gesture overrides/AT Bypassing mechanisms, and confirm that the user wants gestures overridden.  EX: A confirmation dialogue before asking for a signature, confirmation dialogue re-appears each time focus leaves the signature panel.

Content Warning: An element that will load a control that bypasses the AT warns the user. EX: A warning on a control that loads a "paint" window.

Failure: A "paint" drawing screen with no heading, no warning, and no preview.  Content fills up screen, making ANY gesture based navigation difficult, trapping the user on that screen, unless they have a device with a hardware back button.
