# SC Shortname

Pointer gestures

# SC Text

All functionality can be operated without requiring precise/timed pointer gestures or multi-pointer gestures.

Note 1: examples of a multi-pointer gesture include two-finger pinch/zoom Note 2: this requirement applies to web content which interprets pointer gestures (i.e. this does not apply to gestures that are required to operate the user agent or assistive technology)

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)

Level A

# Related Glossary additions or changes

Pointer inputs: input devices that can target a specific coordinate (or set of coordinates) on a screen, such as a mouse, pen, or touch contact. (modified slightly from https://w3c.github.io/pointerevents/#glossary)

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 2, *new* Guideline "Pointer Accessible"

# Description

TODO: A description of what the intent of the SC is, including what users benefit from the content successfully addressing it (examples are helpful, but not required).

Understanding: It may not always be possible for users to perform specific gestures (e.g. draw a complex path with their finger on a touchscreen) in a precise and timely manner - they may lack the precision/accuracy/speed. Further, it may not always be possible for users to perform multi-pointer gestures (e.g. a two-finger pinch/zoom, three-finger rotation)

# Benefits

TODO: Clear information about how the proposal will benefit users, along with justification and evidence of the benefits (this may be a link to a different resource).

# Testability

TODO: Description of how this SC can be tested. This may include manual, automated, or semi-automated mechanisms.

# Techniques

Don't rely solely on pointer gestures that require high precision or specific timings; don't rely on multi-pointer gestures; provide alternatives that do not require gestures (e.g. additional visible controls that perform the same/similar action as a quick flick/swipe) and alternatives that only require a single pointer, rather than multi-pointer.