# SC Shortname

Keyboard with AT (that remaps key input)

# SC Text

All functions available by keyboard are still available by keyboard after accessibility-supported assistive technology that remaps keystrokes is turned on.

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)

Level AA

# Related Glossary additions or changes

N/A

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 2, *new* Guideline "Inputs with Assistive Technology"

# Description

It is not always possible for users to activate arbitrary keys on a keyboard, as these may be reserved for commands to operate an assistive technology. Assistive technologies may intercept key presses before they reach the content (e.g. JavaScript on a webpage), except in very specific circumstances (such as when a text entry field receives focus).

This success criteria would apply to the assistive technology that is accessibility-supported and remaps the keyboard.

# Benefits

This ensures that all users can operate the functionality when the keyboard is used with the assistive technology.

# Testability

1. Determine what functions can be done with the keyboard.
2. Turn on the assistive technology that remaps the keyboard.
3. Use the keyboard to operate the functions on the screen.  Check all possible keystrokes and combinations of keystrokes.
4. Check that #3 is true.

# Techniques

Content should not rely on user's ability to arbitrarily press keys (e.g. don't add a `keydown`/`keyup`/`keypress` handler simply to the `<body>`); ensure functionality hangs off of focusable controls; rely on `focus`/`blur`/`click` events; can listen for key presses, but only when focus is in a traditional input/text entry field (as there AT doesn't interfere with key presses) OR use `role="application"` (where you indicate to AT that you will handle all keyboard input directly, suppresses reading keys etc.)
