# SC Shortname

Input-agnostic

# SC Text

All functionality can be operated without requiring any particular type of input mechanism

# Suggestion for Priority Level (A/AA/AAA)

Level AA

# Related Glossary additions or changes

N/A

# What Principle and Guideline the SC falls within.

Principle 2, *new Guideline "Inputs with Assistive Technology"

# Description

There is a wide range of potential input devices that a user may be using to access / interact with a web site or web application. These include keyboard and keyboard-like interfaces, mice, touchscreens, pen/stylus. On most devices, it is possible for users to switch between different input devices during the same session/interaction (for instance, on a touchscreen-enabled laptop, users may begin interacting with a site using their trackpad and keyboard, but switch to using the touchscreen for certain interactions).

In addition, there are many input scenarios where assistive technologies interpret user interactions and translate them into user agent directives, such as moving focus to an element or activating an element, without emulating any traditional type of input such as a keyboard or mouse (i.e. no "fake" key events or mouse events are being generated).

If a site/application relies only on particular input-specific event handling (such as `keydown`/`keyup`/`keypress` or `mousedown`/`mouseup`/`mousemove` JavaScript events), it may not be possible for certain users to interact with the site/application using their input device. Authors must ensure that their site/application can be accessed and operated using the widest possible range of input devices.

# Benefits

A site/application that is input-agnostic will be usable and operable by a wide range of users who may be using a variety of input devices.

# Testability

Manual testing - authors should test their site/application using the widest possible range of input devices.

# Techniques

- only rely on high-level, input-agnostic events like `focus`/`blur`/`click`; by definition, these events are not input-specific, and generally user agents are designed to trigger these regardless of specific input device
- register separate event handlers to cover various input devices - e.g. register handlers to cover mouse, keyboard and touch interactions, instead of simply relying on just one set of event handlers specific to a particular input modality
